{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2870
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat0\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\'00;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Chapter 3: The War of the Pacific (1879\'961883)
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Summary of the Critical Juncture (CJ):
\f1\b0  Triggered by disputes over saltpeter, this CJ exposed the complete absence of a functional, unified national state. It resulted in military defeat, territorial loss, the destruction of the economy, and a chaotic reconstruction period led by military caudillos and emerging civilian elites.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Bottom-up Democratic Process?
\f1\b0  This CJ was not initiated by a bottom-up process, but it sparked one during the wartime resistance. Indigenous peasants and 
\f2\i montoneras
\f1\i0  (guerrillas) mobilized to fight alongside military leaders like Andr\'e9s A. C\'e1ceres, using their participation to demand the elimination of the oppressive indigenous tribute and to fight for political inclusion. However, once in power, C\'e1ceres allied with the landowning elite and turned his back on the peasants, thwarting this bottom-up democratizing effort.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Portfolios and Sectors Involved:
\f1\b0  The core demands centered heavily on the 
\f0\b Economy (Hacienda)
\f1\b0  and 
\f0\b War/Interior
\f1\b0  sectors. The peasant uprisings were driven by economic demands to eliminate the indigenous tribute, while the state's budget was almost entirely consumed by the military and foreign debt. During the reconstruction, civilian elites pushed for fiscal decentralization so that local departments could manage their own 
\f0\b Public Goods
\f1\b0 , such as education, roads, and bridges.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \strokec2 Chapter 4: The Crisis of the Aristocratic Republic (1920\'961933)
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Summary of the CJ:
\f1\b0  The collapse of the exclusionary oligarchic state was triggered by the 1929 global economic depression, the fall of the Legu\'eda dictatorship, and extreme political polarization. This era saw the emergence of mass political parties (APRA and the Communist Party) and culminated in the bloody Trujillo insurrection of 1932, the assassination of President S\'e1nchez Cerro, and the restrictive 1933 Constitution.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Bottom-up Democratic Process?
\f1\b0  
\f0\b Yes.
\f1\b0  This CJ was heavily driven by massive bottom-up social mobilizations. It featured indigenous uprisings in the southern Andes (like the Rumi Maqui rebellion), an aggressive urban labor movement fighting for the 8-hour workday, and university students demanding academic reform. These groups actively fought against a "competitive oligarchy" that restricted voting to only 2% of the population.\
\ls2\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Portfolios and Sectors Involved:
\f1\b0  The demands were a broad mix of 
\f0\b Labor, Public Goods, and Political Rights
\f1\b0 . The working classes demanded fair wages and labor protections. APRA's "Minimum Plan" heavily targeted the 
\f0\b Economy sector
\f1\b0  by demanding taxes on large landowners, while simultaneously demanding vast 
\f0\b Public Goods
\f1\b0  (universal free education, social security) and full 
\f0\b Political Rights
\f1\b0  (universal suffrage for everyone over 18, including women).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \strokec2 Chapter 5: The Military Revolution (1968\'961975)
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Summary of the CJ:
\f1\b0  Triggered by a coup led by radical military officers (General Velasco Alvarado), this CJ permanently dismantled the traditional oligarchy and the semi-feudal 
\f2\i gamonalismo
\f1\i0  system through a radical agrarian reform and the nationalization of foreign enclaves.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Bottom-up Democratic Process?
\f1\b0  The CJ was initiated as a top-down military intervention specifically designed to preempt and control a massive bottom-up democratic overflow. During the 1950s and 1960s, a vigorous bottom-up process of rural unionization, massive peasant land invasions (e.g., in La Convenci\'f3n), and urban migrations overwhelmed the oligarchic state. To prevent a radical communist revolution from below, the military stepped in to execute structural reforms from above, resulting in "democratization without democracy" via corporatist state organizations like SINAMOS.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Portfolios and Sectors Involved:
\f1\b0  The focus shifted heavily toward 
\f0\b Agriculture, Public Goods, and the Economy
\f1\b0 , while 
\f0\b Political Rights
\f1\b0  (like voting and free speech) were explicitly suppressed by the dictatorship. The peasants' primary demand was land ownership, placing the 
\f0\b Ministry of Agriculture
\f1\b0  at the center of executing the Agrarian Reform. Urban migrants demanded public goods like housing, water, and schools. To manage the new state-capitalist model, the military drastically expanded the state's economic portfolios, creating the Ministries of Industry, Fishery, and Energy and Mines.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 \strokec2 Chapter 6: Terrorism, Hyperinflation, and Fujimori's Coup (1980\'961992)
\f1\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Summary of the CJ:
\f1\b0  Defined by the brutal armed conflict against Sendero Luminoso and MRTA, the economic devastation of the 1980s (where heterodox policies led to 7,500% hyperinflation), and the total collapse of the traditional political party system. It ended with Fujimori's 1992 
\f2\i autogolpe
\f1\i0  and the imposition of a neoliberal constitution in 1993.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Bottom-up Democratic Process?
\f1\b0  
\f0\b No.
\f1\b0  This period represents a severe process of 
\f0\b de-democratization
\f1\b0 . Although the 1980s began with the granting of universal suffrage to illiterates, the extreme violence of Sendero Luminoso and the subsequent state terrorism systematically assassinated grassroots leaders, destroyed social organizations, and paralyzed civil society. Sendero Luminoso explicitly rejected bottom-up democratic negotiations, boycotting elections and using terror to create power vacuums.\
\ls4\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\uc0\u8226 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Portfolios and Sectors Involved:
\f1\b0  The sheer scale of the crisis forced the state to prioritize survival, placing the 
\f0\b Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF)
\f1\b0  and the 
\f0\b Ministries of Defense and Interior (PCM)
\f1\b0  at the absolute center of governance. The hyperinflation crisis demanded radical economic stabilization and structural adjustments, making the Economy sector the focal point for international creditors (IMF) and domestic survival. Concurrently, the terrorist threat led to the creation of Political-Military Commands, transferring massive state power and territorial control to the Defense sector. Demands for public goods and social rights collapsed as the state went bankrupt, reducing social spending to historical lows.\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \strokec2 ****The book\'92s epilogue indeed proposes that the fall or political vacuum of Pedro Castillo (following his attempt to close Congress) opened the 
\f0\b Sixth Critical Juncture
\f1\b0 \'97termed the "critical juncture of neoliberalism"\'97because this event acted as a catalyst that brought to the surface and condensed multiple accumulated crises and unresolved historical contradictions.\
According to the authors, this critical juncture is the condensation of three colliding "moments" or temporal dimensions:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	1	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Current Moment (Immediate Rupture and Social Polarization):
\f1\b0  This outbreak is characterized by an open confrontation between the extreme right and factual powers on one side, and a "democratizing popular movement" made up of peasants, indigenous groups, and women (mainly from the southern regions) on the other. Castillo's ouster and the subsequent protests laid bare the profound contempt of the elites for the popular will and the political agency of citizens from the provinces. This resulted in severe police and military repression by the State, which treated the protesters as enemies rather than citizens, leaving a toll of 47 dead and over 1,200 injured.\
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Medium-Term Moment (The Failure of 30 Years of Neoliberalism):
\f1\b0  The crisis sparked by Castillo's departure condensed the discontent accumulated over three decades of the neoliberal model's hegemony. It exposed suffocating structural contradictions, such as the urgent need to change the primary-export economic model, the profoundly unequal reach of the state in providing public goods across the national territory, and the collapse of the political, electoral, and representational systems.\
\ls5\ilvl0
\f0\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	3	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The Long-Term Historical Moment (Unresolved Historical Legacies):
\f1\b0  Finally, the current crisis brought to the forefront underlying problems that Peru has dragged along since its colonial and republican eras. These include the urgency of a delayed democratic revolution to eliminate discrimination and privileges; the recognition of the country as a pluricultural nation-state in the face of a persistent racist and classist matrix used by elites to stigmatize "the other"; and the struggle to rescue the "common good," which ended up being devoured by neoliberal privatization and turned into private business.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \strokec2 In conclusion, Pedro Castillo's fall is not presented as a mere governmental crisis, but as the rupture event that detonated all the accumulated discontent against the economic model of the last 30 years. It laid bare territorial inequalities, structural racism, and the total disconnection of the State from Peruvian society.\
\pard\tx720\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \strokec2 \
}